Badminton Study Guide
History
1. Badminton as we know it today was first played in England in 1873.
2. Badminton became a medal sport during the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona.
3. The current governing body for badminton is called the Badminton World Federation (BWF). 

How to Play
	The game begins with determining which team should serve first.  After this is determined the serve begins in the right service court.  The serve must go diagonal into the service box across the net.  The receiving player returns the shuttle and this begins a rally between both teams until a player fails to return the shuttle or commits a fault.  A fault occurs when the shuttle falls outside the boundary line or fails to go over the net.  If the shuttle happens to contact the net on the serve and still goes in it is considered a “let” serve and must be redone.  The shuttle may be hit only once per side and cannot be played off ones body.  The racquet may not come in contact with the net at any time.  

Rules

For doubles matches, the rules are:
* A match consists of best of 3 games 
* The side that first scored 21 points shall win using rally scoring.
* The side winning a rally shall add 1 point to its score. 
* When the score becomes 20-20, the side which scores 2 consecutive points shall win that game( win by 2), if the score becomes 29-29, the side that scores the 30th point shall win that game. 
* The side winning a game serves first in the next game.
* The shuttle hitting the line is considered in.
* Even points should be served from the right service box, odd points from the left service box.
* In doubles when serving only the player in the receiving service court can return the serve, his/her partner is not allowed to reach over to return the serve.
* The shuttle is the only piece of equipment that can touch the net legally.
	
Types of Shots
1. Serve- must be done underhand and below the waist. 
2. Clear- a defensive technique use to hit a shot deep to the opponent’s backcourt. 
3. Drop- a finesse shot that falls rapidly just over the net on the opponent’s side. 
4. Drive- a fast shot that takes a horizontal flight over the net. 
5. Smash- a “kill shot”, a fast forward shot difficult to return.  Similar to a spike in volleyball. Badminton’s primary attacking stroke.

Terms
1. Fault- a violation of the rules, either in serving, receiving or during a rally.
2. Let- If the shuttle happens to contact the net on the serve and still goes in the service box.
3. Long service line- in singles the back boundary line. In doubles the line is 2.5 ft. inside the back boundary line.  The serve may not go past this line. 
4. Short service line- the line 6.5 ft. from the net.  A serve must reach this line to be legal. 
5. Service court- Area into which the serve must be delivered. 
6. Shuttle- official name for the object that players hit aka “birdie”. 
7. Badminton net height - 5 feet. 
(OVER)






