Andriy Yarmolenko sure knows how to rub Everton's nose in it.

Not content with stringing them on for more than a year with broken promises he would be signing, when he finally DID show up at Goodison, it was to deliver a match-winning display against the Blues.

The Ukraine winger scored twice on his full debut, and produced a compelling attacking performance in tandem with Marko Arnautovic that suggests reports of West Ham's demise under Manuel Pellegrini may just be exaggerated.

Certainly, this was not – a couple of nervous, disorganised defensive moments apart – a team that looks like it will get their manager sacked any time soon.

The Hammers were quicker, stronger, more athletic and – crucially – had far more quality in front of goal than Everton, and it was Yarmolenko who provided so much of that.

The Mersey club's board must have watched on with a mixture of envy and disgust. They twice thought they'd signed him, first after they met with his Ukraine club Kiev in the summer of 2015 to thrash out a fee, and then in January 2016.

On that occasion the winger's agents even came to Goodison as guests to watch the Capital One Cup semi final, but then reneged on the deal as they engineered a move to Dortmund instead.

He was the difference between the teams, and has already suggested West Ham's £17.5m investment could be money well spent.

Where Yarmolenko twice produced moments of clarity and clinical calm in the box in the first half to score, at the other end Cenk Tosun had far easier chances and twice seemed to blindly panic as he failed to find the net.

In the Premier League, those moments cost dear, and for all West Ham's defensive frailty, the partnership with Arnautovic in tandem with the exciting skills of Felipe Anderson on the flanks, gives them a dimension the teams at the bottom don't have.

Arnautovic has more involvements in goals than any player bar Mo Salah in the Premier League in the last calendar year, and he showed why on 11 minutes to link play then produce a fine awareness in teeing up Yarmolenko in front of goal.

It was two – and well deserved - on 31 minutes when Mark Noble won the ball and fed Yarmolenko, who shimmied delightfully past two markers before producing a stunning, curling finish to beat Jordan Pickford.

Everton simply don't have that quality in their strike force. Tosun has shown some promise, but he didn't look like a finisher here, heading tamely at Lukasz Fabianski from barely six yards, and then mis-hitting an easy finish in front of goal.

In fact, the Blues were outplayed for long periods of this game, and yet were given a fortunate lifeline just before half time, when manager Marco Silva surprised everyone by sending on Bernard for his debut.

That was harsh, because the subbed player Morgan Schneiderlin had lost his father in the week leading up to the game, but it worked because the Brazilian provided a ball in stoppage time that Kenny eventually crossed for Gylfi Sigurdsson to head home.

It didn't last, and it was Arnautovic who ended Everton resistance. Despite being surrounded by five defenders, he linked superbly with the energetic Pedro Obiang to find space to finish.

It was no more than West Ham deserved, and belied their four straight defeats coming into the match – and also, remarkably, gave the Hammers successive victories over Everton for the first time since 1973. Momentous for Pellegrini then, in more ways than one.

Follow all the action as it happened below.
TEAMS

Everton: Pickford, Kenny, Holgate, Zouma, Digne, Gueye, Schneiderlin, Walcott, Sigurdsson, Calvert-Lewin, Tosun

Subs: Stekelenburg, Baines, Bernard, Davies, Dowell, Lookman, Niasse

West Ham: Fabianski, Zabaleta, Balbuena, Diop, Masuake, Rice, Obiang, Noble, Yarmolenko, Anderson, Arnautovic

Subs: Adrian, Cresswell, Ogbonna, Sanchez, Snodgrass, Antonio, Lucas