Digital image processing
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This article is about mathematical processing of digital images. For artistic processing of images, see Image editing.

In computer science, digital image processing is the use of computer algorithms to perform image processing on digital images.[1] As a subcategory or field of digital signal processing, digital image processing has many advantages over analog image processing. It allows a much wider range of algorithms to be applied to the input data and can avoid problems such as the build-up of noise and signal distortion during processing. Since images are defined over two dimensions (perhaps more) digital image processing may be modeled in the form of multidimensional systems.
Contents

    1 History
    2 Tasks
    3 Digital image transformations
        3.1 Filtering
        3.2 Image padding in Fourier domain filtering
        3.3 Filtering Code Examples
        3.4 Affine transformations
    4 Applications
        4.1 Digital camera images
        4.2 Film
    5 See also
    6 References
    7 Further reading
    8 External links

History

Many of the techniques of digital image processing, or digital picture processing as it often was called, were developed in the 1960s at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Bell Laboratories, University of Maryland, and a few other research facilities, with application to satellite imagery, wire-photo standards conversion, medical imaging, videophone, character recognition, and photograph enhancement.[2] The cost of processing was fairly high, however, with the computing equipment of that era. That changed in the 1970s, when digital image processing proliferated as cheaper computers and dedicated hardware became available. Images then could be processed in real time, for some dedicated problems such as television standards conversion. As general-purpose computers became faster, they started to take over the role of dedicated hardware for all but the most specialized and computer-intensive operations. With the fast computers and signal processors available in the 2000s, digital image processing has become the most common form of image processing and generally, is used because it is not only the most versatile method, but also the cheapest.

Digital image processing technology for medical applications was inducted into the Space Foundation Space Technology Hall of Fame in 1994.[3]
Tasks

Digital image processing allows the use of much more complex algorithms, and hence, can offer both more sophisticated performance at simple tasks, and the implementation of methods which would be impossible by analog means.

In particular, digital image processing is the only practical technology for:

    Classification
    Feature extraction
    Multi-scale signal analysis
    Pattern recognition
    Projection

Some techniques which are used in digital image processing include:

    Anisotropic diffusion
    Hidden Markov models
    Image editing
    Image restoration
    Independent component analysis
    Linear filtering
    Neural networks
    Partial differential equations
    Pixelation
    Principal components analysis
    Self-organizing maps
    Wavelets

Digital image transformations
Filtering

Digital filters are used to blur and sharpen digital images. Filtering can be performed in the spatial domain by convolution with specifically designed kernels (filter array), or in the frequency (Fourier) domain by masking specific frequency regions. The following examples show both methods: [4] 